---
layout: post
title:  CtCi 1.3 - URLify
date:   2016-11-27 18:14:00
categories: Array String
---
**Question:** Write a method to replace all spaces in a string with `%20`. You may
assume that the string has sufficient space at the end to hold additional characters,
and that you are given the "true" length of the string. Note: if implementing in Java, please
do this using a character array so that you can perform the operation in place.

*Example:*  

- Input: `"Mr John Smith    "`, `13`  
- Output: `"Mr%20John%20Smith"`

**Solution:**

If one were to not do this in-place, then the problem becomes *extremely* trivial:

{% highlight python %}
def urlIfy(s,n):
  """ python strings """
  url = ""
  add = "%20"

  for i in range(0,n):
      val = s[i]
      if (val == " "):
          url += add
      else:
          url += val

  return url
{% endhighlight %}

**O(n) time, O(n) space**

An more space-efficient **in-place solution** would clearly be preferred.

Here we run in to a few complications - string manipulation can't be done in-place
as python strings are immutable. You then have to consider the input a character array,
as the question suggests we do so for Java.

Thus you have something like `["M","r"," ","J","o","h","n"," ","S","m","i","t","h"," "," "," "," "]`
as input, which becomes `"Mr John Smith    "` in string form (just apply `''.join()` on it).

Even here the algorithm to perform our substitution seems simple: we know that the array
contains enough elements to hold our spaces, and the "true" length of the string
given tells us where exactly our actual string is located in the array.

Here a *slight note of caution* - one should clarify with the interviewer just what the "extra space" in the array given to us is. If it is exactly enough to hold our url-ified string, then we need not worry. If, though,
we have the possibility of being given excess space in the array, then we might want to firstly find the number of spaces in the string, and thus derive the length of our new "true" string --> thus letting us put a null terminating character to indicate where our new true string ends.

Considering the simpler view mentioned above, the algorithm is given below.

{% highlight python %}
def urlIfy(s,n):
    """
    in place, but must be given
    character array instead of string
    """
    idx = len(s) - 1

    # iterate through "true" parts of string
    for i in range(n-1,-1,-1):    # n-1, n-2 , ... 0
        val = s[i]
        if (val == " "):
            s[idx] = "0"
            idx -= 1
            s[idx] = "2"
            idx -= 1
            s[idx] = "%"
        else:
            s[idx] = val
        idx -= 1

    # if need to return string, do ''.join(s)            
    return s
{% endhighlight %}

An interesting implementation note here, also mentioned in *CtCi*, is that iterating through the
string backwards while performing string manipulation is useful as it avoids the
prospect of overwriting any existing characters (if iterating from the start of the array, we would have to shift characters forward before adding in the "%20").

Indeed, adding in the statement `print "i:", i,"idx:", idx ,'[',val,']','[',''.join(s),']'` at the top of our `for` loop gives us some very informative `stdout` output:

```
i: 12 idx: 16 [ h ] [ Mr John Smith     ]
i: 11 idx: 15 [ t ] [ Mr John Smith   h ]
i: 10 idx: 14 [ i ] [ Mr John Smith  th ]
i: 9 idx: 13 [ m ] [ Mr John Smith ith ]
i: 8 idx: 12 [ S ] [ Mr John Smithmith ]
i: 7 idx: 11 [   ] [ Mr John SmitSmith ]
i: 6 idx: 8 [ n ] [ Mr John S%20Smith ]
i: 5 idx: 7 [ h ] [ Mr John n%20Smith ]
i: 4 idx: 6 [ o ] [ Mr Johnhn%20Smith ]
i: 3 idx: 5 [ J ] [ Mr Johohn%20Smith ]
i: 2 idx: 4 [   ] [ Mr JoJohn%20Smith ]
i: 1 idx: 1 [ r ] [ Mr%20John%20Smith ]
i: 0 idx: 0 [ M ] [ Mr%20John%20Smith ]
```
**The algorithm runs in O(n) time, O(1) space**

***A short note on the `range()` function***

Note that `range()` can be made to take negative steps giving a third parameter, `step`,
which otherwise defaults to `1`. Essentially we have `range(a,b,step)` meaning
"move from `a` to `b` in steps of `step`". (The actual formula for the range at each iteration is
`r[i] = start + step*i`)

Examples seem better:
{% highlight python %}
>>> range(13,0,-1)
[13, 12, 11, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1]
>>> range(13,-1,-1)
[13, 12, 11, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0]
>>> range(13,0)
[]
>>> range(13)
[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]
>>> range(0,13,-1)
[]
>>> range(0,13,2)
[0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12]
{% endhighlight %}
