---
layout: post
title: "LeetCode # 15 3Sum"
date:  2016-12-21 18:21:24
categories: Array TwoPointers
---
**Question:**
Given an array `S` of `n` integers, are there elements `a`, `b`, `c` in S such that `a + b + c = 0`? Find all unique triplets in the array which gives the sum of zero.

Note: The solution set must not contain duplicate triplets.

```
For example, given array S = [-1, 0, 1, 2, -1, -4],

A solution set is:
[
  [-1, 0, 1],
  [-1, -1, 2]
]
```


**Solution:**  
{% highlight python %}
def threeSum(nums):
  nums = sorted(nums)
  sols = set()        # set avoids duplicates
  if (len(nums) < 3):
    return []

  for i in range(0,len(nums)-1):
    if ((i != 0) and (nums[i] == nums[i - 1])):     # skip duplicates
      continue

    l = i + 1
    r = len(nums) - 1

    # using 2sum, find a,b s.t. a + b = -i (i.e. a + b + i = 0)
    while (l < r):
      # found a triple! - now add to set and move on to next possible triple
      if (nums[l] + nums[r] == -nums[i]):
        sols.add((nums[l],nums[r],nums[i]))   
        l += 1
        r -= 1
      # too small, try to make it bigger
      elif (nums[l] + nums[r] < -nums[i]):
        l += 1
      # too big, try to make it smaller
      else:
        r -= 1

  return list(sols)   # convert set to list and return
{% endhighlight %}

The original 2-sum problem runs in O(n) time, and this runs in **O(n<sup>2</sup>) time**. The reasons are obvious when one considers that we essentially apply the 2-sum problem's solution during each iteration of our for loop.

A few more things to consider:

- [This](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f5zMijlCz7o) video presented the basis for the above solution,
- While [this](http://blog.gainlo.co/index.php/2016/07/19/3sum/) article gave helpful tips on this class of questions.
- We're inserting our triples into the set as `tuple`s, not arrays (since arrays aren't hashable). Note that `Tuple` is standalone class in python, as is explained [here](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/python/python_tuples.htm). Consider the following piece of code

```
>>> b = (1,2,4,5)
>>> type(b)
<type 'tuple'>
```

This is an ***alternate solution*** that removes the need for using as set to avoid duplicates. It thus
improves our space constraints.

{% highlight python %}
def threeSum(nums):
  nums = sorted(nums)
  sols = []

  for i in range(0,len(nums)-1):
    if ((i != 0) and (nums[i] == nums[i - 1])):    # skip duplicates
        continue

    l = i + 1
    r = len(nums) - 1

    # using 2sum, find a,b s.t. a + b = -i (i.e. a + b + i = 0)
    while (l < r):
      # found a triple! - add to arr and move to next possible unique triple
      if (nums[l] + nums[r] == -nums[i]):
        sols.append([nums[l],nums[r],nums[i]])
        # avoid duplicates - stops at last identical l,r
        while ((l < r) and (nums[l] == nums[l + 1])):
            l += 1
        while ((l < r) and (nums[r] == nums[r - 1])):
            r -= 1
        # move on to unique
        l += 1
        r -= 1
      # too small, try to make it bigger
      elif (nums[l] + nums[r] < -nums[i]):
        l += 1
      # too big, try to make it smaller
      else:
        r -= 1

  return sols
{% endhighlight %}

Although the technique used to avoid duplicates above intuitively makes sense, consider a few points
of explanation and emphasis:

- For a specific `i`, there can be no two `r`'s for the same `l` - and vice versa for
`l`'s with respect to `r`'s. Note that `l`, `r`, and `i` here refer to `nums[l]`, `nums[r]`,`nums[i]` from the code.
- Note that during our duplicate avoidance code, we stop at the last duplicate `l` and `r` respectively - we *do not* move on to the unique `l` and `r` during this code. Such flow allows for simpler code - the `l += 1` and `r += 1` that is always triggered will thus come in to use correctly, and won't need to be put into a dirty `else` condition.
